My delight in Pride and Prejudice is so manifold that I hardly know how to begin telling it, but I am tempted first to try with my wonder at the constantly increasing fame of the author. Yet her fame seems the least thing in our love of her, our joy in her subtle and beautiful and ever adequate art. It is the dignity and sweetness and brightness of her nature which take us most, and our affection grows in honor of her as we think over the modest facts of her gentle life, which can be told in twenty lines, but never can be told often enough in their full significance. Unless daily sacrifice this side of martyrdom is a fault there is nothing to blame in the story of Jane Austen's life. we worship them, or at best receive from us a piety mixed with our pity; we cannot help knowing they were poor things, though divine. If our human frailties, our vices, our foibles, have a consecration in them it does not keep us from being ashamed, or at best, sorry for them. But this altogether admirable woman, good as she was great, we could offer praise without such reserve, when we joined last year in her apotheosis a century after her death. The defects of her qualities are as few as may be in our mortal conditioning, and they have the charm which she knew how to impart to the faults of her most endearing creations. But to talk of her so seems an offence against the restrained art which knew no excess, and it is like rather noisily boasting of the perfectly ascertained loveliness of characters like Anne Elliott, Emma Woodhouse, Fanny Price, Catherine Morland, and above all Elizabeth Bennet, which each in its sort derived from the character of Jane Austen; for whether she knew it or not she always drew from herself, and gave the creatures she loved the loveliness of her own soul. It seems impossible that she who is still so freshly young and whose fame now fills the world anew was born a hundred and forty years ago. Her father was rector of the livings of Steventon and Dean, which adjoined each other in the County of Hampshire, and it was at Steventon that she came into the world, the fifth of a good many brothers and sisters. There she grew up through a very glad girlhood in a life rounded to its close by the limits of pleasant countrysides in Hants and Kent, and such now shrunken social capitals as Bath and Southampton and of her happy temperament. Against the background of their gayeties and the simpler pleasures of the country, and the joys of a family rich in the dreamings and doings of those many brothers and sisters, with herself first in their incentives, she painted her own portrait in the novels she wrote for twenty years and the letters she was always writing to the end. But in her own time, her star shone so dimly in the literary firmament, that only here and there a telescopic eye distinguished it from the nebulous host and such meteoric lustres as are always winking about the heavens of every time. The greatest and kindest of her contemporaries knew her excellence, and Scott's generous praise confessed her gift finer than his own; but criticism grew slowly to the sense of it. Now, indeed, her public is of a consciousness so intensively pervasive that it seems as if the literary world of her day were filled with her alone, as if she had been really sole in it; but that is a very mistaken idea. She was not alone even in her sort and this renders her work not less but more precious. If she was Shakespearean she was like Shakespeare in being first among her peers, or if peers is saying too much for them, then first among her kind, as he (to whom she has been too largely likened) was among his kind. Nobody begins of himself, and as Shakespeare, who was of his time and of such contemporaries as Jonson, Marlowe, Webster, Greene, Beaumont and Fletcher, began from many forgotten dramatists, Jane Austen was of such contemporaries as Maria Edgeworth, Frances Burney, of all the other writers of English fiction, with a clear light which has steadily glowed for a hundred years. Her style has the rare distinction of absolute prose, which at times has the anxiety of literary decorum and is stiffened by the formality of the eighteenth century ideals, but is often of the simplicity of the best talk, and always of the naturalness which still freshly charms. It is never of poetic quality, it is the elect speech of life expressing itself without pretending to emotions not felt, but finding human nature sufficient for its highest effects. Her prose is never of rhythmical movement; she kept her dancing for the balls she loved; and her joy in human nature seldom went beyond it to the nature outside of it. Now and then, but seldom and very sparingly, she brings outdoors into her page; she mentions a shrubbery or a plantation, or a very dirty road; there is no parade of mountains or clouds, of forests or meadows; even when she has a party of her people go "exploring," she makes no dramatic use of the scenery, and Box Hill does not share in the evolution of character; at the furthest, as with the woods of Pemberley in Pride and Prejudice, she permits herself a restrained topographical statement. There is convincing proof that she is no poet in the few lines which have survived from her very indifferent rhyming, and her favorite poet was George Crabbe, who would have cast his fidelity to life in prose if he could, and confided it to verse because he must. Her admiration for his admirable tales in verse did not stop short of a deliciously playful pretence of passion for her talent a charm which satire never has. We have only to call it satire in order to feel its difference from all other irony, and to find in it a sort of protesting pity, a sort of latent will ingness that the reader shall come to the rescue against it. To be sure, almost every character in her fiction is more or less a fool, as every one is in life, and if there is not a tacit allowance from the author that she shares the universal folly with the reader, there is a sort of flattering concession that they form together something like the only exceptions to the rule. If he will consent to share the folly constantly bathed in the shimmer of that electrical irony,he cannot refuse her delight in the company of the fools who people her page and seldom fail of some appeal in their moments of sense or even nonsense. There are only a few stark-foolish fools, like first of all Mr. Collins, Lady Catherine de Bourgh, and Mrs. Bennet in Pride and Prejudice. Mrs. Norris in Mansfield Park, John Thorp and General Tilney in North anger Abbey, Sir Walter Elliott and Mrs. Tom Musgrove in Persuasion, John Dashwood in Sense and Sensibility, Mrs. Elton in Emma, and a few besides, are beyond compassion because they are unkind and not because they are foolish. Even Mrs. Bennet has a redeeming pitiableness, even Mr. Collins entreats our tolerance because he is a sheer donkey and born so. Otherwise the fools are lost to mercy because they are not only foolish but cruel, and selfish and stupid and brutal and mean and vulgar. You cannot wish to save them from of the pitiable and even lovable fools whom the reader ought to have it on his conscience to distinguish from them. He ought to remember the kindliness of Mr. Woodhouse and his thoughtfulness of others, the good-will of Miss Bates in Emma, the blandness of Lady Bertran's selfishness in Mansfield Park, the romantic wish to love as well as to be loved of Marianne Dashwood in Sense and Sensibility, the long endeavor of Lady Russell in Persuasion to atone for an act of disastrous meddling, and the suffering of Anne Elliott for yielding to her influence, the girlish pure-heartedness of Catherine Morland in Northanger Abbey, and others whom my memory fails of. They are wholly or anything) that attitude. Her irony indeed broke into satire, into bitter sarcasm, toward the cruel and hopeless fools of her story; but for the others it was caressing to open fondness. They became her joke; a joke that they would have entered into themselves, if that could have been; and her tender amusement at their absurdity may well have come from the life of ingrowing family affection which she led among the brothers and sisters, and progressively nephews and nieces, in the home beloved of her beyond all the other world. It is known how she lived her whole life among them, how she wrote her wonderfully studied literature and evolved the masterpieces of her beautiful art in the midst of them, and yet always knew how to isolate herself in the gayety which must have teased her so to share it. The home of the Austens, whether in town or country, would of all the other world, but part of it also when they would in the high and harmless things beyond which great capitals have nothing to offer. They were distinctly and in the best sense gentle, tending in the fondness of later times to gentility, but actually without that taint of conscious superiority which is the most perilous infection of gentle-folk. In this kingdom the second of the two sisters was unquestionably sovereign; her thought was always at work, always at play, and that of the others, especially of her older sister, was always at work and at play with her. Indefinitely early she began to write little stories so constantly among the rest that it might almost be said in cooperation with them; and she made little dramas, comedy tending to farce, which they acted together. At last, when her twenty years were ripe, she wrote a novel which her father thought so good that he offered it, with her proud but somewhat timorous consent, to the most respectable publisher he could think of; but, though he assured the publisher of this fact, Mr. Cadell, with the sometime fatuity of his trade, promptly declined it. Without losing the first post he returned the manuscript, and it was not until seven years later that Pride and Prej udice was given to the world by another house. In the meantime Sense and Sensibility, "By a Lady," had appeared, and when Pride and Prejudice followed from whatever obscurer press, it consulted the diffidence of the writer by masking as the work of "the Author of Sense and Sensibility. " It is not my wish to follow the succession of the other books, of Northanger Abbey, of Emma, of Persuasion, of Mans field Park, because for one thing I am not sure of it, one may share her own misgivings as to her wisdom and taste at times, though one grows in regard for her good heart and in respect for her sound mind, not steadily but finally. One shares the author's conviction that she is the most adorable character in her fiction; she will not say in all fiction, but the reader need not share her scruple, and may well challenge other readers to name him any heroine equal to her. When I came to read Pride and Prejudice the tenth or fifteenth time at the close of 1917 for the purposes of this Introduction, I found it as fresh as when I read it first in 1889, after long shying off from it. I found it as fresh as at any earlier reading, but I had never realized before the open simplicity of the design, and the young artlessness of its art; so young that every now and then the artist lapsed to the artizan, and frankly operated a scheme which hesitated to operate itself. The quality of the different persons is disclosed from the beginning; the chief personages make no secret of their characteristics, and at their first encounter the history of their love might have been as fitly named Arrogance and Impertinence as Pride and Prejudice. But arrogance was not the keynote of Darcy's character, and impertinence was only the effect of semi-humorous resentment in Elizabeth; if they are both merely nasty at the first they quickly intimate their real natures, and in the retrospect one begins very soon to guess what they really are. Darcy indeed changes radically pertness is a fault in a pretty girl who is also good, is part of her charm, and is immediately useful in helping the author to keep the whole story within the play of her characteristic irony. This sounds the depths as well as lights the surfaces of the drama, which it never allows to become utter tragedy, though it involves the effect of the passions which conduce to tragedy. Though so many of us know the story, I might safely tell it again in outline without dulling the interest of those readers whom I am supposed to be making acquainted with it. But I will not take this shabby chance; I will do nothing worse than deal with the points of the story as they have presented themselves in my own latest reading of it, without trying to give the shape or sequence of a review to my essay. Every scene is full of character if not of incident, and the charm of Elizabeth is full of her sweetness and archness as well as her pertness. Every page of what is so distinctively a "novel of manners" testifies to the fidelity and veracity of the author's observation. The snobbishness of the local society whether in its ruder or finer vulgarity, has earlier recognition in Bingley's sister, who is instinctively jealous of Elizabeth from merely seeing her with Darcy, though their acquaintance begins in mutual repulsion. She sits beside Darcy while he writes, and comments on the symmetry and rapidity of his penmanship, for in that period of social formality he writes in the presence of the family with no more consciousness of being in it than a person takes up a book and begins to read, as often happens in the fiction if not the fact of the have commonly happened, or Jane Austen would not have had Bingley's brother-in-law do it. People talked with a stilted formality and conversation moved with a high literary gait much beyond the imagination of our easy-going day. But even then it does not seem probable that two girls talked together like Elizabeth and her friend Charlotte Lucas, or that Charlotte should express her low views of matrimony so deliberately as she does. This is for the instruction of the reader, as the burlesque priggishness of Elizabeth's sister Mary is too openly for his diversion. As for the colloquial or rhetorical languaging of the dialogue throughout, I have noticed in my latest reading of the book that the style is natural when the matter in hand requires the expression of no grand emotion, but that then the author mounts her high horse, and advances at the stately pace which the imitators of the great Doctor Johnson had set. She ceases to be Jane Austen, demure, ironical, natural, and becomes Fanny Burney after Fanny Burney has learned her lesson in the process of becoming Madame d'Arblay. It is a pity, but it cannot be helped; fortunately the impassioned moments, the didactic moments, in Pride and Prejudice are few, as they are in Jane Austen's other stories, where they tend to become constantly fewer. We must always remember that "P. and P." as she likes playfully to call it in the letters to her sister Cassandra, was her first book, which she wonderfully wrote in her twentieth year, and that she was then willingly, almost eagerly, subordinate to the literary with the rare gift of either seeing or hearing their fellow-beings, had not yet learned to report their looks or words as they really saw or heard them. Things went on from bad to worse throughout the long Georgian era, till late in the Victorian time, when fiction had escaped the instruction of the prepotent lexicographer (he never spoke as he wrote himself, however) and let its heroes and heroines utter their most intensive feelings as simply as they had felt. Jane Austen perhaps never unlearned the mistaken lesson which she had learned so painfully as well as with so much pains. But I think that in each successive novel her people employ the high horse less and less in their great emotions and keep the levels of life afoot, the levels which she loved beyond any other when she could consent to be herself or let them be themselves. I venture to think that the playful family spirit may have forgotten itself in the office of criticism, which again I fancy it must often have exercised upon the fiction so mostly created in the family midst with the family privity. But very possibly I am wrong, though I hate to own it, for I should like to believe that the faults of Jane Austen were always somebody else's faults. The procession of fools in their delightful variety moves from the start of the story, and the types of vulgarity distinguish themselves from one another, with a loudness in Elizabeth's aunt Mrs. Phillips which is scarcely even surpassed by that of her sister Lydia, though it attests itself supremely only in that moment when she flings up her window and shouts her hospitable good-will to the militia Fool for fool it is hard to choose between Elizabeth's mother who appears in the earliest scene and her cousin Mr. Collins who comes on soon after the rise of the curtain and recurs again and again on the scene almost to the fall of the curtain. An author who was so faithful to nature could not in mere virtue of her youth be less loyal to convention than have a villain begin his machinations at the outset, but it must be owned that Wickham is very artistically handled, and that this admirably managed scoundrel is eclipsed only by the superior fascination of a fool so incomparable as Mr. Collins, whom nobody who ever knew him can have forgotten, any more than he forgot himself; if he has a blemish it is the ideal perfection of his folly, it is his so unfailingly acting in character. I cannot remember any passages of fiction more richly ridiculous than the rise and progress of his passion for Elizabeth springing instantly from his knowledge of her sister's probable engagement, and then instantly turning from her rejection of him to the comfort of her friend Charlotte Lucas's readily responsive affection. The whole thing is unsurpassed if not unparalleled comedy; there is no passage descriptive or expressive of him which fails the reader's just expectation in his spoken or written word. One abandons oneself to a supreme delight in his love-making, his self-appreciation as a clergyman, his veneration for his noble patroness Lady Catherine de Bourgh, and his deference of all his clerical obligations to his duty to her; it is hard to determine whether he is more characteristic as host or guest or in what point he shines most; but if I must choose I think (though I am not sure) congratulating himself that Elizabeth's opportune rejection of him saved him any share in their sorrow and disgrace, he advises Lydia's father to "console himself as much as possible, to throw off his unworthy child from his affection forever, and leave her to reap the fruits of her own heinous offence." His counsel to Elizabeth not to accept Darcy because it must be so distasteful to his aunt, Lady Catherine de Bourgh, who has designed him for her daughter, is not wanting, and is supported by the fact that her ladyship has personally assured him that she will never give her consent to the match. "I thought it my duty to give the speediest intelligence of this to my cousin that she and her noble admirer may be aware of what they are about, and not run hastily into a marriage which has not been properly sanctioned." At the same time he declares his joy that "Lydia's sad business has been so well hushed up," but censures her father for receiving her and her husband after they have been married. "It was an encouragement to vice; and had I been rector of Longbourn I should very strenuously have opposed it. You ought certainly to forgive them as a Christian, but never to admit them in your sight, or allow them to be mentioned in your hearing."